docs: add a deep dive/best practices article (#5929)
SAP/ui5-webcomponents: docs/5-development/06-deep-dive-and-best-practices.md

### Events <a name="metadata_events"></a>

Most components fire *events* to notify the application of user interaction.

You can list the events fired by your component in the `events` metadata object, but this is optional and mostly done for documentation purposes.
Any event that you dispatch from your component will reach the application anyway.

Here is an example how to fire an event from your component:

1. Declare the event in your `metadata` (optional, but highly recommended for documentation purposes and clarity):

```js
events: {
	toggle: {}
}
```

2. In the `.hbs` template bind an event listener to some part of your component's HTML to be able to take action on user interaction:

```html
<div class="my-panel">
	<button class="my-panel-toggle" @click="{{onPanelToggleClick}}">Toggle</button>
	<div class="my-panel-body">
		<slot></slot>
	</div>
</div>
```

In this example we have a simplified "panel" component consisting of a toggle button and a slot for the panel content.
We bind the `click` event of the `<button>` we'll use for toggling our panel to the `onPanelToggleClick` method.

> For more on the `.hbs` template syntax and event listeners click [here](./04-understanding-hbs-templates.md#syntax_at).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more on the `.hbs` template syntax and event listeners see, [Event handlers assignment](./04-understanding-hbs-templates.md#syntax_at).
```

3. Implement the event handler in your component:

```js
class MyPanel extends UI5Element {
	...
	
	onPanelToggleClick(event) {
		this.togglePanel(); // do some work when the user clicks the button
		this.fireEvent("toggle"); // fire the event
	}
}
```

The `fireEvent` method is provided by the base `UI5Element.js` class and is therefore available to all components. The best practice is to always use
this method instead of simply calling the standard `dispatchEvent` function as `fireEvent` has framework-related enhanced functionality.

That's all it takes to manage an event's lifecycle! Now your component's users may listen for the `toggle` event:

```js
const panel = document.getElementsByTagName("my-panel")[0];
panel.addEventListener("toggle", () => {});
```

#### Working with event parameters

The above example demonstrated an event with no parameters. However, you can send arbitrary data to the app when firing an event.

Here's how:

> 1. Declare the event in your `metadata` and describe its parameters (again, optional, but good for consistency and documentation purposes):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Declare the event in your `metadata` and describe its parameters (this is again optional, but good for consistency and documentation purposes):
```

However, if you set the [noConflict](../2-advanced/01-configuration.md#no_conflict) configuration setting to `true`, only the **prefixed** event will be dispatched.

So, when `noConflict: true` is configured, the same code: 

```js
fireEvent("toggle");
```

would result in just:
 - `ui5-toggle`

Therefore, the best practice when binding to events, **fired by other UI5 Web Components** in your `.hbs` template, is to 
always use the prefixed (`ui5-`) event.

Example:

```html
<div class="my-component">
    <button @click="{{onNativeButtonClick}}">Click me</button>
    <ui5-button @ui5-click="{{onUI5ButtonClick}}">Click me</ui5-button>
    
    <input @change="{{onNativeInputChange}}" />
    <ui5-input @ui5-change="{{onUI5InputChange}}"></ui5-input>
    
    <ui5-list @ui5-item-click="{{onUI5ListItemClick}}"></ui5-list>
</div>
```

Please note the following:
 - For native HTML elements (`input`, `button`) we bind to their respective events (`change`, `click`) normally.
 - For other UI5 Web Components (`ui5-button`, `ui5-input`, `ui5-list`), rendered by our component, we bind to the `ui5-` events as these are guaranteed to be dispatched even when `noConflict` is configured to `true`.

> If we used the non-prefixed versions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we use the non-prefixed versions:
```

```html
<div class="my-component">
    <button @click="{{onNativeButtonClick}}">Click me</button>
    <ui5-button @click="{{onUI5ButtonClick}}">Click me</ui5-button>
    
    <input @change="{{onNativeInputChange}}" />
    <ui5-input @change="{{onUI5InputChange}}"></ui5-input>
    
    <ui5-list @item-click="{{onUI5ListItemClick}}"></ui5-list>
</div>
```

this would work well only with the default configuration (where `noConflict` is `false` and both events are fired), but our code would
"break" the moment an app sets `noConflict: true` since that would suppress UI5 Web Components from firing the non-prefixed versions and 
our event handlers (`onUI5ButtonClick`, `onUI5InputChange`, etc.) would never be executed.

### Wrapping up metadata <a name="metadata_wrapping_up"></a>

> Metadata determines most of your component's API - describe its tag name, properties, slots and events there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metadata determines most of your component's API - describe its tag name, properties, slots, and events there.
```

For example, consider a component with the following metadata:

```js
{
	tag: "my-demo-component",
	properties: {
		text: {
			type: String,
			defaultValue: "Hello"
		},
		selected: {
			type: Boolean,
			noAttribute: true	
		}
	},
	managedSlots: true,
	slots: {
		"default": {
			type: Node,
			propertyName: "items",
			invalidateOnChildChange: true
		},
		"icon": {
			type: HTMLElement
		}
	},
	events: {
		change: {
			detail: {
				newText: {type: String}
			}
		}
	}
}
```

This metadata conveys the following:

This component will have the following getters/setters, created for it by the framework:

>  - `this.text` (getter/setter, due to the `text` property) with default value of "Hello"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `this.text` (getter/setter, due to the `text` property) with default value of "Hello";
```

>  - `this.selected` (getter/setter, due to the `selected` property) with default value of `false` (all Booleans are `false` by default in HTML and `defaultValue` cannot be configured for them)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `this.selected` (getter/setter, due to the `selected` property) with default value of `false` (all Booleans are `false` by default in HTML and `defaultValue` cannot be configured for them);
```

>  - `this.items` (getter only, due to having `managedSlots: true` and the `propertyName` of the default slot being `items`) - an array of all *Text Nodes and HTML Elements* in the default slot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `this.items` (getter only, due to having `managedSlots: true` and the `propertyName` of the default slot being `items`) - an array of all *Text Nodes and HTML Elements* in the default slot;
```

>  - `this.icon` (getter only, due to having `managedSlots: true` and the `icon` slot) - an array of all HTML Elements in the `icon` slot 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `this.icon` (getter only, due to having `managedSlots: true` and the `icon` slot) - an array of all HTML Elements in the `icon` slot;
```

The component will have only 1 attribute:

>  - `text` due to the `text` property (the other property has `noAttribute: true` set)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `text` due to the `text` property (the other property has `noAttribute: true` set);
```

When the `text` property changes, the `text` attribute will also be reflected and vice-versa.

The component fires 1 event:

>  - `change` with one string parameter: `newText`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `change` with one string parameter: `newText`;
```

### Physical and logical components <a name="rendering_physical_logical"></a>

Each component that provides a `static get template()` method will be rendered (will have its shadow DOM built) initially and every time it gets invalidated.

Example:

```js
import InputTemplate from "./generated/templates/InputTemplate.lit.js"; // this is the compiled Input.hbs template

// This component will have shadow DOM since it provides a template
static get template() {
	return InputTemplate;
}
```

Components that do not provide a `static get template()` method are considered *logical* or *marker* elements only. These components are never rendered (do not have a shadow root at all)
and their only purpose is to serve as items for higher-order components. The classical example of a logical component is a select option.

Example:

```html
<ui5-select>
	<ui5-option>Cozy</ui5-option>
	<ui5-option selected>Compact</ui5-option>
	<ui5-option >Condensed</ui5-option>
</ui5-select>
```

The `ui5-option` component does not provide a template, and is therefore never rendered. However, the `ui5-select` component, which is a physical component that has a template, 

> renders HTML corresponding to each of its children (`ui5-option` instances) as part of its own shadow DOM. <a na

Reviewer: ```suggestion
renders HTML corresponding to each of its children (`ui5-option` instances) as part of its own shadow DOM. ```

### What is invalidation? <a name="invalidation"></a>

Invalidation means scheduling an already rendered component for asynchronous re-rendering (in the next animation frame). If an already invalidated component gets changed
again, before having been re-rendered, this will have no downside - it's in the queue of components to be re-rendered anyway.

> Important: when a component is re-rendered, only the parts of its shadow DOM, dependent on the changed properties/slots are changed, which makes most updates very fast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Important:** when a component is re-rendered, only the parts of its shadow DOM, dependent on the changed properties/slots are changed, which makes most updates very fast.
```

A component becomes *invalidated* whenever:

>  - a *metadata-defined* **property** changes (not regular properties that f.e. you define in the constructor)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - a *metadata-defined* **property** changes (not regular properties that, for example, you define in the constructor);
```

 - children are added/removed/rearranged in any **slot** and the component has `managedSlots: true` set in the metadata object

>  - a slotted child in a **slot** configured with `invalidateOnChildChange: true` is invalidated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - a slotted child in a **slot** configured with `invalidateOnChildChange: true` is invalidated;
```

Changes to properties always cause an invalidation. No specific metadata configuration is needed.

```js
properties: {
	text: {
		type: String
	}
}
```

Whenever `text` changes, the component will be invalidated.

Changes to slots do not cause an invalidation by default. Most components do not need to render differently based on whether they have any slotted children or not.
The most common example for this are simple general-purpose containers (completely agnostic of their content).

```js
metadata: {
	slots: {
		"default": {
			type: HTMLElement
		},
		header: {
			type: HTMLElement
		},
		footer: {
			type: HTMLElement
		}
	}
}
```

This component will not invalidate when children are added/removed from any of its slots.

> However, some components render differently based on whether they have children or not (e.g. show counters/other UX elements for the number of children, f.e. carousel; or have special styles when empty or have a child in a specific slot, f.e. button with an icon).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, some components render differently based on whether they have children or not (for example, show counters/other UX elements for the number of children, like a carousel; or have special styles when empty, or have a child in a specific slot, such as, button with an icon).
```

If that is the case for the component you're building, set `managedSlots: true` in your component's metadata. Thus, your component will become invalidated whenever children are added, removed or swap places in any of its slots.

```js
managedSlots: true,
slots: {
	"default": {
		type: HTMLElement
	},
	header: {
		type: HTMLElement
	},
	footer: {
		type: HTMLElement
	}
}
```

Now that this component has `managedSlots: true`, changes to each slot will trigger an invalidation. Note that the `managedSlots` configuration is global (and not per slot).

And finally, there are components that not only need to render differently based on the number/type of children they have, but they must also get invalidated

> whenever their children change. This holds true for all components that work with abstract items (such as select with options, combo box with combo box items)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whenever their children change. This holds true for all components that work with abstract items (such as, select with options, combo box with combo box items)
```

because these abstract items do not have a template (do not render themselves) and therefore rely on their parent to render some DOM for them in its own shadow root. So, when they get invalidated, they must also invalidate their parent.

```js
managedSlots: true,
slots: {
	"default": {
		type: HTMLElement,
		invalidateOnChildChange: true
	},
	header: {
		type: HTMLElement
	},
	footer: {
		type: HTMLElement
	}
}
```

Only changes to children in the "default" slot will trigger invalidation for this component. Note that `invalidateOnChildChange` is defined per slot (and not globally like `managedSlots`).

> Finally, `invalidateOnChildChange` allows for more fine-granular rules when exactly children can invalidate their parents - see [Understanding UI5 Web Components Metadata](./03-understanding-components-metadata.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, `invalidateOnChildChange` allows for more fine-granular rules when exactly children can invalidate their parents. For more information, see [Understanding UI5 Web Components Metadata](./03-understanding-components-metadata.md).
```

## Lifecycle hooks <a name="lifecycle"></a>

Using the right lifecycle hook for the task is crucial to a well-designed and performant component.

### 1. `constructor` <a name="lifecycle_constructor"></a>

Use the constructor for one-time initialization tasks.

What to do:

>  - initialize private variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - initialize private variables;
```

>  - bind functions to `this` (very common when using the `ResizeHandler` helper class)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - bind functions to `this` (very common when using the `ResizeHandler` helper class);
```

>  - do one-time work when the first instance of a given component is created (f.e. instantiate a helper class or attach a special event listener to the `window` object)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - do one-time work when the first instance of a given component is created (for example, instantiate a helper class or attach a special event listener to the `window` object);
```

What not to do:

>  - anything rendering-related (use `onBeforeRendering`/`onAfterRendering`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - anything rendering-related (use `onBeforeRendering`/`onAfterRendering`);
```

 - anything related to the state (use `onBeforeRendering`)

>  - anything requiring DOM manipulation (the component isn't attached to the DOM yet - use `onAfterRendering` or `onEnterDOM`/`onExitDOM`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - anything requiring DOM manipulation (the component isn't attached to the DOM yet - use `onAfterRendering` or `onEnterDOM`/`onExitDOM`);
```

```html
<my-filter-component filter="John">
	<my-filter-item name="John Smith"></my-filter-item>
	<my-filter-item name="Jane Doe"></my-filter-item>
	<my-filter-item name="Jack Johnson"></my-filter-item>
</my-filter-component>
```

The user would only see the first and third items as these are the only ones we rendered an individual slot for (the ones matching the `filter` value of "John").

In summary: `onBeforeRendering` is the best place to prepare all the variables you are going to need in the `.hbs` template.

### 3. `onAfterRendering` <a name="lifecycle_after"></a>

The `onAfterRendering` lifecycle hook allows you to access the DOM every time the component is rendered.

You should avoid using this method whenever possible. It's best to delegate all HTML manipulation to the framework: change the state of the component,
the component will be invalidated, the template will be executed with the latest state, and DOM will be updated accordingly.
It is an anti-pattern to manually change the DOM.

In some cases, however, you must directly access the DOM since certain operations can only be performed imperatively (and not via the template):

>  - setting the focus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - setting the focus;
```

>  - manually scrolling an element to a certain position

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - manually scrolling an element to a certain position;
```

>  - calling a public method on a DOM Element (f.e. to close a popup)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - calling a public method on a DOM Element (for example, to close a popup);
```

>  - reading the sizes of DOM Elements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - reading the sizes of DOM Elements;
```

Example:

```html
<div class="my-demo-component">
	<input id="first">
	<input id="second">
</div>
```

```js
onAfterRendering() {
	this.shadowRoot.querySelector("#second").focus();
	this._totalWidth = this.shadowRoot.querySelector("div.my-demo-component").offsetWidth;
}
```

### 4. `onEnterDOM` and `onExitDOM` <a name="lifecycle_dom"></a>

Unlike `onBeforeRendering` and `onAfterRendering`, which sound like parts of the same flow (but are not, and are actually used for completely independent tasks),
`onEnterDOM` and `onExitDOM` should almost always be used together, therefore they are presented as a whole in this article.

>  - `onEnterDOM` is executed during the web component's standard `connectedCallback` method's execution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `onEnterDOM` is executed during the web component's standard `connectedCallback` method's execution.
```

>  - `onExitDOM` is executed during the web component's standard `disconnectedCallback` method's execution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `onExitDOM` is executed during the web component's standard `disconnectedCallback` method's execution.
```

If you have prior experience with web component development, you could think of `onEnterDOM` as `connectedCallback` and of `onExitDOM` as `disconnectedCallback`.

Note that these hooks are completely independent of the component's rendering lifecycle, and are solely related to its insertion and removal from DOM.

Normally, when a web component is created, for example:

```js
const b = document.createElement("ui5-button");
```

> it is already fully operational, although it isn't in DOM yet. Therefore, you should use `onEnterDOM` and `onExitDOM` only for functionality, related to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is already fully operational, although it isn't in the DOM yet. Therefore, you should use `onEnterDOM` and `onExitDOM` only for functionality, related to
```

the component being in the DOM tree at all (and not to rendering, stying or anything related to the shadow root).

Common use cases are:

>  - registering/de-registering a ResizeHandler

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - registering/de-registering a ResizeHandler;
```

>  - working with Intersection observer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - working with Intersection observer;
```

>  - any work you want to carry out only if the component is in the DOM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - any work you want to carry out only if the component is in the DOM;
```

 - the shadow DOM of the `static-area-item`, created for the respective component.

**This is necessary because such a split is the only way to guarantee that a popup (dropdown, rich tooltip, popover, etc.) will always be
positioned correctly on the HTML page**, even if parts of the page have:
 - `transform: translate`
 - `overflow: hidden`
 - `z-index`

Since the `ui5-statia-area` is a top-level `body` child, it is guaranteed to be on top of everything else on the page with the correct CSS styles,
regardless of the page structure and [stacking context](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Stacking_context).

If we did not use a static area, for example as in a component, defined like this:

In the `MySelect.js` file:

```html
<div class="my-select">
	<h1>Click to open the dropdown:</h1>
	<button @click="{{onOpenDropdownClick}}">Dropdown</button>
	
	<ui5-popover id="#popover" ?open="{{dropdownOpen}}">
		<ui5-list>
			{{#each dropdownItems}}
				<ui5-li>{{text}}</ui5-li>
			{{/each}}
		</ui5-list>
	</ui5-popover>
</div>
```

In the `MySelect.js` file:

```js
class MySelect extends UI5Element {
	...
	onOpenDropdownClick(event) {
		this.dropdownOpen = true;
	}
}
```

> then when the user clicks the `button`, and the `ui5-popover` opens (due to its `open` property having been set to true),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then when the user clicks the `button`, and the `ui5-popover` opens (due to its `open` property having been set to `true`),
```
